Lg/telemetry wip (#1720)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-docs: content/md/en/docs/maintain/monitor.md

keywords:
---

Monitoring network operations and performance is an important part of maintaining a healthy, stable, and secure ecosystem.
By default, Substrate nodes provide low-level **telemetry** components to automatically collect and transmit detailed information about the operation of each node in the network.

> Telemetry is the underlying mechanism—sensors, probes, or instrumentation—for collecting and transmitting data points as they occur to an endpoint so that you can observe, monitor, and alert on system behavior.

Reviewer: I'd probably say something closer to "This information is referred to as telemetry" (since you summarised it well above). I don't feel like this sentense really adds anything :)

(PS I love this approach of having each sentence on a newline..)

Author: modified to focus on the backend > endpoint

As a developer or node operator, there's rarely any need to know the implementation details of how these low-level telemetry components provide information about computer and network operations.
At a high level, the information collected from each public node is sent to a default telemetry server and aggregated for display in a front-end dashboard.

The following diagram provides a simplified overview of the workflow.

![Default telemetry for Substrate nodes](/media/images/docs/telemetry-overview.png)

## View telemetry data

The [Polkadot telemetry](https://telemetry.polkadot.io/) dashboard provides a real-time view of how currently online nodes are performing.
You can choose the information you want to display by turning visible columns on and off from the list of columns available.

To see the list of columns and modify which columns are displayed, click **Settings**.

![Click Settings to modify the visible columns](/media/images/docs/list-view-control.png)

The columns you can toggle on and off include:

> - **Validator** to display an indicator to differentiate validator nodes from other nodes. 

Reviewer: Just as a note; this column I think hasn't been working properly for a whlie (owing to the data it expects not being provided now) so it may be fixed or removed. Probably not an issue here though :)

- **Block Propagation Time** to display the time it took for the node to import the most recent block.
- **Last Block Time** to display the time it took for the node to author the most recent block.
- **Node Uptime** to display the number of days the node has been online without being restarted.

### Pin node information

You can keep the information for one or more nodes in view in the dashboard by clicking the line displayed for the node in the dashboard list.
For example, if you want to keep the information for two nodes visible while the information for other nodes scrolls by, you can select the nodes in the list and pin the information in place.

![Keep information for selected nodes displayed](/media/images/docs/pin-nodes.png)

### Display nodes on a map

As an alternative to the list of nodes, you can display nodes on a global map.
The map provides a visual representation of where nodes are located, where blocks are being produced and imported in real time, and where there are higher concentrations of nodes geographically.

To see represented on a map, click **Map**.

![Display nodes on a global map](/media/images/docs/node-map-view.png)

> In this view, you can hover over any node location on the map to display a subset of the information available for the node, including the node name, location, best block number, best block hash, and block time statistics.

Reviewer: I wonder whether it's worth noting that nodes taht do not have a known location will not be displayed in this view.

In general, setting up your own telemetry server involves establishing monitoring and alerting policies for both **on-chain events** and individual **node operations**.

### On-chain activity

You can monitor on-chain activity for specific events, such as transactions submitted from a certain address, a change to the current validator set.
On-chain monitoring typically involves connecting to RPC nodes to check for specific values, identify processing delays, or track the timing of events. 
In most cases, you only need two RPC instances to handle requests for all of your hosts. 
However, it's recommended that you run your own RPC servers to service these requests in case there are issues with the public RPC nodes. 
Some examples of applications that query on-chain information are [polkabot](https://gitlab.com/Polkabot/polkabot) and [polkadot-basic-notification](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-basic-notification).

### Node operations

You should monitor each node that you run on the network for basic information about its operation such as the current block height, the number of peer-to-peer connections, CPU usage, and the available free memory.

> By default, Substrate exposes many useful metrics on the http://localhost:9615/metrics endpoint. 

Reviewer: This localhost endpoint is only available if a substrate node is running locally of course

This endpoint outputs metrics using a simple key-value format. 
For example:

```text
polkadot_database_cache_bytes 0
```

> However, you can also include tags within the key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, tags can also be included within the key.
```

Perhaps?

- Node exporter is process that listens on a port and reports application-specific metrics to Prometheus.
- Alertmanager is a tool that enables you to create and route alerts based on the rules you specify. Alertmanager allows you to configure how and where to send alert if something goes wrong. For example, you can send instant messages for warning alerts, but page an on-call technician for critical alerts
- Loki is a scalable log aggregation system that allows you to view and search logs from all components in your infrastructure in one place.

For a simple example of setting up node monitoring using Prometheus, Grafana, and node exporter, see [Monitor node metrics](/tutorials/get-started/monitor-node-metrics/).
For a simplified example of using Loki, see [Remote monitoring](/deploy/deployment-options/#remote-monitoring).

### Change the telemetry server

After you have configured the backend monitoring rules for your nodes, you can use the `--telemetry-url` command-line option when you start a node to specify the telemetry server that you want to send telemetry data to.
You can pass this option multiple times to specify multiple telemetry endpoints. 

> You can also specify how verbose metrics should be, with level 0 denoting the least verbose through level 9 denoting the most verbose. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must also specify how verbose metrics should be, with level 0 denoting the least verbose through level 9 denoting the most verbose. 
```

As in; you must provide both a URl and a verbosity level for the option to be valid :)

Author: Ah, didn't know that!
